# Migrating to Tool Kit v4

Version 4 of Tool Kit lets you configure it much more easily for your team's or project's specific use cases, without having to resort to custom plugins as often. Although we've made it as backwards compatible as possible, there are some fundamental changes to its internals and configuration that mean you'll need to update your repo's `.toolkitrc.yml` and any custom plugins when migrating to Tool Kit v4.

> [!NOTE]
> This migration will take 30m-1hr. If at any point you get stuck or something unexpected happens, [reach out to the Platforms team](https://financialtimes.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C02TRE2V2Q1) and we'll be happy to help.

## 0. Update to latest versions of Tool Kit packages

Update `dotcom-tool-kit` and all the `@dotcom-tool-kit/*` packages you have installed to their latest versions. This can be done with the following command (requires [`jq`](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/)):

```sh
npm query ":root > [name*=dotcom-tool-kit]" \
| jq '.[] | .name + "@latest"' \
| xargs npm install
```

If the `npm install` fails with an error suggesting the use of `--force`, edit the command to call `xargs npm install --force` last instead and run again. This should fix npm's version resolution and shouldn't result in any version errors.

<details><summary>what</summary>

1. `npm query ":root > [name*=dotcom-tool-kit]"`: get all packages installed as a direct dependency of your repo with `dotcom-tool-kit` in their name
2. `jq '(.[] | .name + "@latest")'`: output a list of just the `name` from the packages, appending `@latest`
3. `xargs npm install`: pass those as arguments to the `npm install` command

So if you have `dotcom-tool-kit`, `@dotcom-tool-kit/jest` and `@dotcom-tool-kit/webpack` installed, this is equivalent to running:

```
npm install dotcom-tool-kit@latest @dotcom-tool-kit/jest@latest @dotcom-tool-kit/webpack@latest
```

(but without you having to manually type that out).

</details>

## 1. Make required changes to configuration

### 1.1. Rename `hooks` to `commands`

> [!NOTE]
> **Why?** A Tool Kit "command" is a name for a group of tasks to run, like `test:local`. In previous versions of Tool Kit, hooks both defined names of commands to run, and managed configuration files. In Tool Kit v4, hooks only manage configuration files, and commands are defined in the Tool Kit configuration files, not in plugin code.

In your `.toolkitrc.yml`, you may have a `hooks` object, which specifies which Tool Kit tasks to run for commands. **Rename this object to `commands`**:

```diff
-hooks:
+commands:
   test:local:
     - Eslint
     - JestLocal
   test:ci:
     - Eslint
     - JestCI
   run:local:
     - Nodemon
     - NextRouter
```

### 1.2. Move `options` to `options.plugins`

> [!NOTE]
> **Why?** In previous versions of Tool Kit, options were plugin-wide. In Tool Kit v4, options can be specified separately for plugins, tasks, and hooks. Although Tool Kit v4 can load a `.toolkitrc.yml` with the old options structure, some options have moved to task-specific options, and so your old options won't validate against the new schema.

In your `.toolkitrc.yml`, you'll have an `options` object. **Move this object so it's nested another level deeper, under a `plugins` key in `options`**:

```diff
 options:
+  plugins:
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/next-router":
       appName: article
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/eslint":
       files:
         - "**/*.{js,jsx,yaml,yml,json}"
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/doppler":
       project: next-article
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/heroku":
       pipeline: ft-next-article
       systemCode: next-article
       scaling:
         ft-next-article-eu:
           web:
             size: standard-2X
             quantity: 5
```

### 1.3. Move task-specific options to the relevant tasks

Run `npx dotcom-tool-kit --help` to validate your config. With this example, Tool Kit warns us that the `@dotcom-tool-kit/eslint` options have completely moved, and some of the `@dotcom-tool-kit/heroku` options have moved:

> Options are defined in your Tool Kit configuration that are the wrong types:
>
> - `@dotcom-tool-kit/eslint` has the issue(s): your `.toolkitrc.yml` has options for the `@dotcom-tool-kit/eslint` plugin, which are now task options. move these options to `options.tasks.Eslint`
> - `@dotcom-tool-kit/heroku` has the issue(s): the option `scaling` has moved to `options.tasks.HerokuProduction.scaling`
>
> Please update the options so that they are the expected types. You can refer to the README for the plugin for examples and descriptions of the options used.

So we need to move these options from the sections in `options.plugins` to a new `options.tasks` section:

```diff
 options:
   plugins:
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/next-router":
       appName: article
-    "@dotcom-tool-kit/eslint":
-      files:
-        - "**/*.{js,jsx,yaml,yml,json}"
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/doppler":
       project: next-article
     "@dotcom-tool-kit/heroku":
       pipeline: ft-next-article
       systemCode: next-article
-      scaling:
-        ft-next-article-eu:
-          web:
-            size: standard-2X
-            quantity: 5
+  tasks:
+    Eslint:
+      files:
+        - "**/*.{js,jsx,yaml,yml,json}"
+    HerokuProduction:
+      scaling:
+        ft-next-article-eu:
+          web:
+            size: standard-2X
+            quantity: 5
```

> [!NOTE]
> As well as options that have completely moved, some options have been removed entirely. It's safe to keep these in your `.toolkitrc.yml`, and Tool Kit won't warn about them. Check the readmes for the plugins you're using to see which options are still required.

### 1.4. Update names of renamed tasks

> [!NOTE]
> **Why?** In previous versions of Tool Kit, options were plugin-wide. In Tool Kit v4, we have task-specific options, and these can be overriden depending on which command is running a task. This means instead of needing to have e.g. separate `JestLocal` and `JestCi` tasks, we can have a single `Jest` task, with a boolean `ci` option that can be set to `true` for the `test:ci` command only.

Run `npx dotcom-tool-kit --help` again. If you have any commands in your `.toolkitrc.yml` that have been renamed, you'll get a message like:

> These tasks don't exist, but are configured to run from commands:
>
> - `JestLocal` (assigned to `test:local` by your app)
> - `JestCi` (assigned to `test:ci` by your app)
>
> They could be misspelt, or defined by a Tool Kit plugin that isn't used by this app.

In your `.toolkitrc.yml`, **rename the tasks to their v4 equivalents**, and specify the appropriate options so you get equivalent behaviour to the old task:

```diff
 commands:
   test:local:
-     - JestLocal
+     - Jest
   test:ci:
-     - JestCi
+     - Jest:
+         ci: true
```

<details><summary><strong>Full list of renamed tasks</strong></summary>

This is a list of all tasks that have been renamed, their v4 equivalents, and the options you need to specify for the same behaviour:

| Renamed task | Tool Kit v4 equivalent | Options to set |
|-|-|-|
| `BabelDevelopment` | `Babel` | `envName: 'development'` |
| `BabelProduction` | `Babel` | `envName: 'production'` |
| `CypressCi` | `Cypress` | `{}` |
| `CypressLocal` | `Cypress` | `{}` |
| `JestCi` | `Jest` | `ci: true` |
| `JestLocal` | `Jest` | `{}` |
| `TypeScriptBuild` | `TypeScript` | `{}` |
| `TypeScriptTest` | `TypeScript` | `noEmit: true` |
| `TypeScriptWatch` | `TypeScript` | `watch: true` |
| `WebpackDevelopment` | `Webpack` | `envName: 'development'` |
| `WebpackProduction` | `Webpack` | `envName: 'production'` |
| `WebpackWatch` | `Webpack` | `watch: true, envName: 'development'` |

</details>

## 2. Migrate any custom plugins

> [!TIP]
> If you only use built-in Tool Kit plugins, **you can [skip to step 3](#3-regenerate-config-files-and-test)**.
>
> Built-in plugins are listed in your `.toolkitrc.yml` with npm package names, like `@dotcom-tool-kit/webpack`; custom plugins are referenced by relative file path, like `./tool-kit/canary`.

<details><summary><strong>Yes, I have custom plugins</strong></summary>

### 2.1. Steps for all plugins

A plugin's `.toolkitrc.yml` acts as a manifest to tell Tool Kit what to load. To prevent issues when attempting to load an old plugin, there is now a **manifest version**. A `.toolkitrc.yml` without a version is implicitly version 1. Tool Kit v4 will **only load plugins with a version 2 manifest**.

Add the `version` to your plugin's `.toolkitrc.yml` (most plugins' `.toolkitrc.yml` files will be empty before this):

```diff
+version: 2
```

### 2.2. Plugins with custom tasks

First, check to see if your custom task can now be provided by a built-in plugin. For example, if you're defining a custom task so you can run the same task multiple times with different options, this can now be done via command-specific task options:

```yml
commands:
  test:local:
    - Jest
  test:e2e-local:
    - Jest:
        configFile: jest.e2e.config.js
```

#### 2.2.1. Import base classes from `@dotcom-tool-kit/base`

The `@dotcom-tool-kit/types` package, which previously exported the base classes for Tasks and Hooks, has been split up into multiple packages. Replace this package with `@dotcom-tool-kit/base` in your dependencies:

```console
$ npm remove @dotcom-tool-kit/types
$ npm install --save-dev @dotcom-tool-kit/base
```

And in your plugin module:

```diff
-const { Task } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/types')
+const { Task } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/base')
```

#### 2.2.2. Add task entrypoints to manifest

Tool Kit no longer eagerly loads your plugin's Javascript entrypoint. The plugin `.toolkitrc.yml` must now **list the tasks your plugin defines**, and you can **only export one task per entrypoint**.

Let's say your plugin has an `index.js` that exports two tasks:

```js
const { Task } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/base')

class CustomTaskOne extends Task {
  run() {}
}

class CustomTaskTwo extends Task {
  run() {}
}

exports.tasks = [CustomTaskOne, CustomTaskTwo]
```

You'll need to split this into multiple files:

<table>
<tr>
<th><code>custom-task-one.js</code></th><th><code>custom-task-two.js</code></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```js
const { Task } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/base')

class CustomTaskOne extends Task {
  run() {}
}

module.exports = CustomTaskOne
```

</td>
<td>

```js
const { Task } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/base')

class CustomTaskTwo extends Task {
  run() {}
}

module.exports = CustomTaskTwo
```

</td>
</table>

You'll then need to specify these task entry points in your plugin's `.toolkitrc.yml`:

```yml
version: 2

tasks:
  CustomTaskOne: ./custom-task-one.js
  CustomTaskTwo: ./custom-task-two.js
```

The keys in the `.toolkitrc.yml` are what determines the task name visible to Tool Kit, which was previously determined by the actual class name, so make sure they match.

### 2.3. Plugins with custom "placeholder" hooks

If you're defining a "placeholder hook" so that you have a custom Tool Kit command you can run, **this is no longer required**; commands can be defined in your repo's `.toolkitrc.yml`. A placeholder hook will look something like this:

```js
const { Hook } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/types')

class Placeholder extends Hook {
  check() {
    return true
  }
  install() {}
}

exports.hooks = {
  'custom:command': Placeholder
}
```

With Tool Kit v4, you no longer need to define this command as a hook to run it; [specifying commands that run tasks](#11-rename-hooks-to-commands) in your `.toolkitrc.yml` is all that's needed. Your placeholder hook can be deleted.

### 2.4. Plugins with hooks extending `PackageJsonHook` or `CircleCIConfigHook`

Instead of needing to define new `package.json` scripts or CircleCI jobs in plugins, you can now do this via hook configuration options in your repo's main `.toolkitrc.yml`.

A custom `package.json` hook might look like this:

```js
const { PackageJsonHook } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/package-json-hook')

class DemoPublishHook extends PackageJsonHook {
    constructor() {
        super(...arguments)
        this.key = 'demo-publish'
        this.hook = 'demo:publish'
    }
}

exports.hooks = { 'demo:publish': DemoPublishHook }
```

This manages `package.json` to add a `scripts["demo-publish"]` that calls `dotcom-tool-kit demo:publish`. To replicate this, add this configuration in your repo's `.toolkitrc.yml`:

```yml
options:
  hooks:
    - PackageJson:
        scripts:
          demo-publish: 'demo:publish'
```

A custom `.circleci/config.yml` hook might look like this:

```js
const CircleCiConfigHook = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/circleci/lib/circleci-config');
const { TestCI } = require('@dotcom-tool-kit/circleci/lib/index');

class DeployProduction extends CircleCiConfigHook.default {
	constructor () {
		super(...arguments);
		this.job = 'tool-kit/deploy-production';
		this.jobOptions = {
			requires: [new TestCI(this.logger).job],
			filters: { branches: { only: 'main' } }
		};
	}
}

exports.hooks = {
	'deploy:production': DeployProduction
}
```

This adds a `tool-kit/deploy-production` job that depends on the `tool-kit/test-ci` job. To replicate this, add this configuration in your repo's `.toolkitrc.yml`:

```yml
options:
  hooks:
    - CircleCi:
        jobs:
          - name: deploy-production
            command: 'deploy:production'
        workflows:
          - name: 'tool-kit'
            jobs:
              - name: 'deploy-production'
                requires:
                  - 'test'
                custom:
                  filters:
                    branches:
                      only: main
```

### 2.5. Plugins with hooks doing other things

You'll need to [talk to the Platforms team](https://financialtimes.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C02TRE2V2Q1) to get support with your migration.

</details>

## 3. Regenerate config files and test

Once `npx dotcom-tool-kit --help` is no longer reporting any configuration or plugin errors, run `npx dotcom-tool-kit --install`. This will regenerate your `package.json` and `.circleci/config.yml`. If you've previously opted out of having your `.circleci/config.yml`, the new version of Tool Kit might not be able to validate it; [get in touch with the Platforms team](https://financialtimes.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C02TRE2V2Q1) and we'll help you update it. Note that Tool Kit v4 makes CircleCI config file generation much more configurable and flexible, so in many cases you'll no longer have to opt out of config file management.

Try running local tasks such as `npm run build`, `npm test`, and `npm start`. If everything's gone well, they'll run successfully; otherwise, Tool Kit should provide an error message that explains how to fix what's wrong. If you're stuck, [talk to us](https://financialtimes.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C02TRE2V2Q1). Commit your changes and open a pull request with them to test your CircleCI workflow is working as expected, and when you merge the PR, keep a close eye on the `main` branch build.
